
# Technical Bid EYH2023
### Nikilesh Ramesh, Albie Gray, Bradley Bell, George Dixon, Jan Fraczek, Dongze Wu
Problem Overview
================

There are currently over 100 million pieces of junk in orbit around the
planet, mostly objects smaller than 1cm [@EYHwebsite]. These objects
pose a threat to operational satellites and future space missions as
they travel at speeds up to 8 km per second [@ESA] and therefore have
huge amounts of kinetic energy. The problem could spiral out of control
if the debris begins to break up objects into smaller pieces, creating a
chain reaction of destruction. Some challenges faced are the sheer
number of objects needed to be moved or destroyed. Larger pieces of
debris can be tracked and collisions avoided, but the smaller pieces are
much harder to track and thus have created problems caused by high speed
collisions. Our efforts to remove the debris must not create any junk in
the process, be it during launch or operation and we must not pose a
threat to the people on earth by any falling debris. We have to act fast
to reduce the amount of debris in orbit or face detrimental consequences
in the future.

Technical Details
=================

Proposal
--------

The proposed solution for space debris removal is a space-based laser
ablation. This solution particularly focuses on the removal of small and
irregularly shaped debris in the Low Earth Orbit. This class of debris
poses a major threat to the various science, communication and other
types of satellites that use this orbit.

A satellite or a network of satellites weighing approximately 1 ton
equipped with a precise laser system capable of delivering an energy
pulse of 600J [@SBL] can be used to de-orbit the small debris. Every
energy pulse delivers kinetic energy, ideally in the opposing direction,
this decreases the total kinetic energy of the debris which subsequently
leads to the drop in velocity.



Over multiple interactions, the velocity of the debris is slowed to
below the critical orbital velocity, thus leading to re-entry.


Technical Challenges
--------------------

This approach works best when the satellite meets the debris in an
head-on geometry and are co-planar. It works with other combinations of
geometry but with reduced efficiency, many more interactions will be
required to de-orbit. One solution to this is using a network of
satellites to cover a large possible combinations of geometry.

Precise and accurate tracking is another technical challenge,
institutions like NASA already have a network of satellites to track
debris, the proposed satellites can also join this network to collect
and share data on the debris. This would require the satellites with
high-tech sensors which put strain on the budget and complexity of the
mission.

Cost
----

Companies like AST SpaceMobile, Black Sky and Eutelsat manufacture
satellites costing between 10 and 60 million dollars. The Starlink
satellite produced by SpaceX costs between 250 to 500 thousand dollars
to make. This is a more realistic valuation for our satellite as it is
of similar dimensions as well as it operates at a similar orbital height
to our design. The cost of the laser the satellite will be fitted with
is hard to judge but looking at lasers with a similar power output it is
likely to be around a million dollars. Assuming we use the SpaceX
service to put our satellite into orbit, the cost per unit is anywhere
between 2.5 and 3 million dollars. To estimate the final cost of the
entire mission including Research and Development, a R&D to product
ratio was used [@RD], which puts the mission cost at around 12 million
spread out over an estimated 10 year mission timeline.

Product Lifecycle
-----------------

The product is expected to have a similar life cycle to that of an
average satellite which is approximately 15 years. The end of a
satellite's lifecycle is usually marked by the exhaustion of the
propellant aboard. The one significant difference when it comes to this
design is that the satellite is set to de-orbit itself and burn up in
earth's atmosphere before it reaches the end of its fuel reserve.

Project Management
------------------

This project has an estimated timeline of 10 years. A Gantt Chart has
been produced with the high-level tasks that will be completed. These
tasks can be further broken down into sub-tasks by the team in order to
ensure that the solution is achievable.

Risk Assessment and Safety
--------------------------

As with every space mission there are big risks associated with it. Some
safety issues arise while launching the satellite like it crashing
before it makes orbit as well as crashing while in orbit. The other
obvious safety issue is associated with the laser, these might include
it targeting the wrong object or causing debris to change course in a
wrong way and cause damage to other satellites. There is also the legal
side of things, the laser can only be used for the purpose of destroying
debris, some might view it as a weapon. Further research has to be done
on the impact of the laser on the ozone layer and the environment.

Patent or intellectual property/licensing information
-----------------------------------------------------

A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a
product or a process that provides, in general, a new way of doing
something, or offers a technical solution to a problem [@WIPO].

Once the satellites are in operation, a patent can be applied for
regarding the laser aspect, which is the USP of this product. This can
be to ensure that no other companies are able to copy, thus achieving
longevity and sustainability. Earth-to-space lasers are already
operational, however in-space lasers are not and the idea is an
innovative design - applying for a patent for this would therefore be
reasonable.

Cybersecurity Statement
=======================

Cybersecurity is critical to this organisation. It is imperative that
access to systems is continuous, intellectual property is protected and
personal data is protected. It must also be ensured that legislation
such as the Data Protection Act and the General Data Protection
Regulation (2018) are followed closely [@GOV].

Company Responsibilities
------------------------

-   Employees will have regular training on recognising different types
    of social engineering

-   Links from external sources will be blocked

-   There will be a dedicated IT specialist who can assist employees in
    identifying malicious material

-   Antivirus software will be updated regularly

-   Multi-factor authentication will be used

-   DDos protection will be provided by companies such as cloudflare and
    imperva

Individual Responsibilities
---------------------------

-   Passwords should be secure and unique for this system

-   Passwords should never be written down or shared with anyone

-   When working remotely, no sensitive information should be viewed on
    unsecured networks

-   Use of a VPN and Antivirus are mandatory and must be kept updated

-   Devices should never be left unattended

Sustainability
==============

Sustainability is an integral part of any idea proposal, ours being no
exception. It is crucial that our solution maintains a high standard of
sustainability throughout each stage - from the initial design idea to
the end-of-life of the product.

Detrimental Impacts
-------------------

It is important that our proposed idea holds no impacts that may cause
more harm than good. This greatly affects sustainability because,
effectively, it means that the solution is not a good one and needs to
be disregarded. Impacts such as:

-   Causing more space debris.

-   Causing more risks to bodies in space, human or otherwise

-   Ineffective clear-up of 'space junk'

Ethical Considerations
----------------------

A product is deemed unsustainable if it wasn't made in a socially
responsible way (in a poor working environment). Therefore, it is
imperative that health and safety regulations are set up in the early
stages to clearly outline the workers rights and what they are/are not
entitled to. If this is done correctly, the project can be considered
\"socially sustainable\". Some examples [@TUC] are:

-   A break after an allotted amount of time.

-   Legitimate safety equipment when working with dangerous machines.

-   Adequate lighting, heating and ventilation for worker comfort.

-   Staff facilities (including toilets)

Economic Factors
----------------

It is exceedingly difficult, especially during aerospace applications,
to keep the cost of the product low. This is due to the nature of the
application: being able to launch bodies into space, along with
selecting the materials that can withstand escaping the atmosphere into
orbit, is expensive. However, as long as at every stage the cheapest
option is sought after while ensuring it still holds the highest
performance capability, the product is a success.

Team Profile
============

Bradley Bell
------------

Aerospace Engineering Responsibilities: Responsible for looking into
statistics in order to focus on issues, funding as well as methods of
laser ablation.

George Dixon
------------

Mechanical Engineering Responsibilities: Responsible for researching
methods for launch, the cost implications of this and also deorbiting
techniques.

Jan Fraczek
-----------

Civil and Structural Engineering Responsibilities:: project choice
matrix, cost evaluation, risk analysis as well as presenting on
different aspects of the project.

Albie Gray
----------

Computer Science Responsibilities: Researched the funding,
sustainability, and wrote the cybersecurity statement. Presented
throughout the project.

Nikilesh Ramesh
---------------

Aerospace Engineering Responsibilities: Responsible for technical
information collection, project management projections as in Gantt
charts and presenting the information to the EYH board.

Dongze Wu
---------

Material Science Responsibilities: Worked on manufacturing and presented
on various aspects of the project.
